Lathering Skin Bar (20% superfat)
Makes approximately 44 oz. of soap.

Note: Because this soap is highly superfatted it can create a very dense lather when rubbed directly on skin. For a light, bubbly effect I recommend lathering with a natural sponge like this one.

33 oz coconut oil, 76 degree* (where to buy coconut oil)
4.83 ounces lye (NaOH)** (where to buy lye)
12.54 oz water
.5 – 1 ounce essential oils (optional)
Laundry Soap (1% superfat)
Makes approximately 44 oz. of soap.

33 oz coconut oil, 76 degree* (where to buy coconut oil)
5.9 ounces lye (NaOH)** (where to buy lye)
12 oz water
.5 – 1 ounce lavender or other essential oils (optional) (where to buy lavender essential oil)
* For soap making purposes there are several types of coconut oil. The stuff I buy has a melting point of 76 degrees. This is the most commonly available kind and the preferred type for soap making. There is also a coconut oil that has a melting point of 92 degrees and another that is “fractionated,” meaning that the long chain triglycerides have been removed, leaving only saturated fats. I have not tested this recipe with either the 92 degree or fractionated oils, but it works well with the 76 degree type.

** You can often find pure lye with no additional plumbing/drain additives in the drain cleaner section of a mom n’ pop hardware store. Lye is a naturally occurring substance that can be made by burning hardwoods and boiling the ashes, but it’s much easier to just buy. If you don’t see it, ask a sales clerk for help. They may be keeping it behind the counter because it has multiple uses. Be prepared to explain that you want to make soap, not meth. 🙂

Equipment:
Note: According to Anne Watson, author of Smart Soapmaking, you can use your regular kitchen utensils as long as you follow these guidelines.

crock pot – 8 quart
stick blender
digital scale
thermometer
glass measuring cups
small glass bowls
plastic spoon with long handle (if you use a wooden spoon like the one pictured below, make sure not to use it for anything but soapmaking)
rubber spatula
sink or bowl filled with vinegar and water for cleaning anything that comes in contact with lye. Follow by cleaning with soap.
protective equipment: long-sleeved shirt, plastic/rubber gloves, safety glasses or protective eye gear
soap mold – (where to buy oval soap mold or square soap mold) A standard sized bread pan is perfect for this batch, cardboard boxes will also work
parchment paper for lining the soap mold (where to buy parchment paper online)